Add missing immutable areas to collections docs (#18186)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/collections/index.md

  - "collections [.NET Framework]"
ms.assetid: 60cc581f-1db5-445b-ba04-a173396bf872
---

# Collections and Data Structures

> Similar data can often be handled more efficiently when stored and manipulated as a collection. You can use the <xref:System.Array?displayProperty=nameWithType> class or the classes in the <xref:System.Collections>, <xref:System.Collections.Generic>, <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent>, System.Collections.Immutable namespaces to add, remove, and modify either individual elements or a range of elements in a collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar data can often be handled more efficiently when stored and manipulated as a collection. You can use the <xref:System.Array?displayProperty=nameWithType> class or the classes in the <xref:System.Collections>, <xref:System.Collections.Generic>, <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent>, and <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespaces to add, remove, and modify either individual elements or a range of elements in a collection.
```

> There are two main types of collections; generic collections and non-generic collections. Generic collections were added in the .NET Framework 2.0 and provide collections that are type-safe at compile time. Because of this, generic collections typically offer better performance. Generic collections accept a type parameter when they are constructed and do not require that you cast to and from the <xref:System.Object> type when you add or remove items from the collection.  In addition, most generic collections are supported in Windows Store apps. Non-generic collections store items as <xref:System.Object>, require casting, and most are not supported for Windows Store app development. However, you may see non-generic collections in older code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two main types of collections: generic collections and nongeneric collections. Generic collections were added in .NET Framework 2.0 and provide collections that are type-safe at compile time. Because of this, generic collections typically offer better performance. Generic collections accept a type parameter when they are constructed and do not require that you cast to and from the <xref:System.Object> type when you add or remove items from the collection.  In addition, most generic collections are supported in UWP apps. Nongeneric collections store items as <xref:System.Object> instances, require casting, and most are not supported for UWP app development. However, you may see nongeneric collections in older code.
```

Reviewer: Can you also xref the System.Collections.Immutable reference on line 21?

Starting with the .NET Framework 4, the collections in the <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent> namespace provide efficient thread-safe operations for accessing collection items from multiple threads. The immutable collection classes in the System.Collections.Immutable namespace ([NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/System.Collections.Immutable)) are inherently thread-safe because operations are performed on a copy of the original collection and the original collection cannot be modified.

<a name="BKMK_Commoncollectionfeatures"></a>
## Common collection features

> All collections provide methods for adding, removing or finding items in the collection. In addition, all collections that directly or indirectly implement the <xref:System.Collections.ICollection> interface or the <xref:System.Collections.Generic.ICollection%601> interface share these features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All collections provide methods for adding, removing, or finding items in the collection. In addition, all collections that directly or indirectly implement the <xref:System.Collections.ICollection> interface or the <xref:System.Collections.Generic.ICollection%601> interface share these features:
```

|Use data Last-In-First-Out (LIFO)|<xref:System.Collections.Generic.Stack%601>|<xref:System.Collections.Stack>|<xref:System.Collections.Concurrent.ConcurrentStack%601><br /><br /> <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableStack%601>|
|Access items sequentially|<xref:System.Collections.Generic.LinkedList%601>|No recommendation|No recommendation|
|Receive notifications when items are removed or added to the collection. (implements <xref:System.ComponentModel.INotifyPropertyChanged> and <xref:System.Collections.Specialized.INotifyCollectionChanged>)|<xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ObservableCollection%601>|No recommendation|No recommendation|
|A sorted collection|<xref:System.Collections.Generic.SortedList%602>|<xref:System.Collections.SortedList>|<xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602><br /><br /> <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601>|
|A set for mathematical functions|<xref:System.Collections.Generic.HashSet%601><br /><br /> <xref:System.Collections.Generic.SortedSet%601>|No recommendation|<xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601><br /><br /> <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601>|

> ### Collection Algorithmic Complexity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Algorithmic complexity of collections
```

> | Mutable                   | Amortized  | Worst Case                | Immutable                          | Complexity |

Reviewer: I think this table could use an intro sentence describing what it's showing.

| `Queue<T>.Enqueue`        | O(1)       | O(`n`)                    | `ImmutableQueue<T>.Enqueue`        | O(1)       |
| `List<T>.Add`             | O(1)       | O(`n`)                    | `ImmutableList<T>.Add`             | O(log `n`) |
| `List<T>.Item[Int32]`     | O(1)       | O(1)                      | `ImmutableList<T>.Item[Int32]`     | O(log `n`) |
| `List<T>.Enumerator`      | O(`n`)     | O(`n`)                    | `ImmutableList<T>.Enumerator`      | O(`n`)     |
| `HashSet<T>.Add`, lookup  | O(1)       | O(`n`)                    | `ImmutableHashSet<T>.Add`          | O(log `n`) |
| `SortedSet<T>.Add`        | O(log `n`) | O(`n`)                    | `ImmutableSortedSet<T>.Add`        | O(log `n`) |
| `Dictionary<T>.Add`       | O(1)       | O(`n`)                    | `ImmutableDictionary<T>.Add`       | O(log `n`) |
| `Dictionary<T>` lookup    | O(1)       | O(1) – or strictly O(`n`) | `ImmutableDictionary<T>` lookup    | O(log `n`) |
| `SortedDictionary<T>.Add` | O(log `n`) | O(`n` log `n`)            | `ImmutableSortedDictionary<T>.Add` | O(log `n`) |

> A `List<T>` can be efficiently enumerated using either a `for` loop or a `foreach` loop, however; an `ImmutableList<T>` does a poor job inside a `for` loop, due to its O(log `n`) time for its indexer. It does fine when using `foreach` however. This is because `ImmutableList<T>` uses a binary tree to store its data instead of a simple array like `List<T>` uses. An array can be very quickly indexed into, whereas a binary tree must be walked down until the node with the desired index is found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `List<T>` can be efficiently enumerated using either a `for` loop or a `foreach` loop. An `ImmutableList<T>`, however, does a poor job inside a `for` loop, due to the O(log `n`) time for its indexer. Enumerating an `ImmutableList<T>` using a `foreach` loop is efficient because `ImmutableList<T>` uses a binary tree to store its data instead of a simple array like `List<T>` uses. An array can be very quickly indexed into, whereas a binary tree must be walked down until the node with the desired index is found.
```

> Additionally, the `SortedSet<T>` has the same complexity as `ImmutableSortedSet<T>`. That's because they both use binary trees. The significant difference of course is that `ImmutableSortedSet<T>` uses an immutable one. Since `ImmutableSortedSet<T>` also offers a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder?displayProperty=nameWithType> class that allows mutation, you can have your immutability and performance too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, `SortedSet<T>` has the same complexity as `ImmutableSortedSet<T>`. That's because they both use binary trees. The significant difference, of course, is that `ImmutableSortedSet<T>` uses an immutable binary tree. Since `ImmutableSortedSet<T>` also offers a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder?displayProperty=nameWithType> class that allows mutation, you can have both immutability and performance.
```

# Collections and Data Structures

> Similar data can often be handled more efficiently when stored and manipulated as a collection. You can use the <xref:System.Array?displayProperty=nameWithType> class or the classes in the <xref:System.Collections>, <xref:System.Collections.Generic>, <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent>, <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespaces to add, remove, and modify either individual elements or a range of elements in a collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar data can often be handled more efficiently when stored and manipulated as a collection. You can use the <xref:System.Array?displayProperty=nameWithType> class or the classes in the <xref:System.Collections>, <xref:System.Collections.Generic>, <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent>, and <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespaces to add, remove, and modify either individual elements or a range of elements in a collection.
```
